but first a double-edged
sword of urban revival even
if some cities are becoming
ever more popular and
desirable they're also becoming
places where the middle
class and lower-income
residents are getting
priced out of the market
economics correspondent Paul
Solman has the story it's
part of his weekly series
making sense
looking down on
Manhattan's old meatpacking
district the High Line a
mecca for more than 7
million eager tourists a
year astride a once derelict
spur of the New York Central
this was an old broken-down
abandoned rail line
elevated rail line a rail
line shrouding the buildings
beneath as a result rents
were cheap in the cutting
edge marginalized moved
in much of this area
of Chelsea was historically
a gay neighborhood and
they were gay men and
wanted to do something
which celebrated the the
history of the old gay
neighborhood noted urban
ologist Richard Florida there's
one of the old buildings
still with the rainbow
flag a remnant of the past
that proved a harbinger of
gentrification to come
once they built the park it
became a draw not us people
but for real estate
developers and they never
anticipated that no one
anticipated the High Line
would be a place that
luxury towers would grow up
around but have they ever
for nearly a mile and a half
the elevated walkway now
winds through towers full
of luxury condos over
the top testimony to the
urban revitalization that
Florida famously championed
in his 2002 book the
creative class we're
going through I think one
of the greatest economic
transformations in history
from an old industrial ii
corporate based vertical
economy to a new knowledge
economy but the twist i
try to add is it's also
urban its its city based
its clustered in cities
florida's twist became gospel
attract members of the
creative class and they in
turn will create jobs which
will in turn renew and
rebuild and it happened just
look at the High Line but
what Florida now sees is the
double edge of the advice
he gave and that so many
followed a bigger denser
city in general increases
the rate of innovation
increases the rate
of star increases the
rate of productivity at
the same time the bigger the
denser the more knowledge
intensive increases the
rate of inequality increases
the rate of economic
segregation makes housing less
affordable so it's a two
sided monster those unintended
consequences of urban
revival are the real world
twist Florida wrestles with
in his latest book the new
urban crisis people want
to park money in real
estate artists the best art
galleries in the world
commercial companies real
estate development firms
financial headquarters
heck companies startups and
companies like Google so
the second dimension is I
kind of call it a crisis
of success these places now
become terribly unaffordable
for anyone who's not either
a knowledge worker or a
techie or a member of the
super rich as a result
pressure on most of the city's
residents now facing apartment
rents and prices soaring
as high as the buildings
that house them many actually
unoccupied because they
are assets for foreigners
parking their money as
Florida puts it in real estate
you stop stocks you stop
bonds now owning real
estate in a superstar city
becomes another class of
asset rents in this building
roughly thirty five hundred
dollars a month for
a one-room studio apartment
forty-seven hundred for a
one-bedroom seven thousand
for two bedrooms I could not
live in a decent Manhattan
apartment by myself I
might be able to live in
Queens or maybe outer skirts
of Brooklyn these days
because it's gotten very
expensive there to sarah
hawk rad a 31 year old speech
therapist who works nearby
lives across town with
roommates was hoping to move
somewhere close with her
boyfriend how much money
would you and he have to earn
just to get to be able to
afford a $4,700 a month
apartment maybe 150 170
like and that's to really
cut down into the bare bones
of what how you live at
least a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars a year
it was testimony like
this that triggered Florida's
aha moment the gradual
displacement of all but the
most successful types
he long urged cities to
attract we did an analysis
which looked at the amount
of money these three
groups the knowledge
creative class but working
blue-collar class and the
service workers had left
over after paying for
housing the creatives had
like 80 or 90 grand left
over the blue collars had
30 and the service workers
had like 15 I realized
that this urbanism
winner-take-all urbanism it was
benefiting one group much
more disproportionately
than the other two
and with ballooning rents
low-income workers are
being squeezed out entirely
banished to the once desirable
suburbs it's a crisis
that's metastasizing of
poverty concentrated
poverty economic distress
in our suburbs it's been
happening for decades
of course the inexorable
pinching of America's middle
class the move towards
what's been called an
hourglass economy with the
prosperous in the top
half the less well-off in
the bottom and fewer and
fewer Americans in between
if the old urban crisis
was about the middle class
flight from the city to the
suburbs yes the new urban
crisis is about really the
disappearance of
middle-class neighborhoods
from our society what
tragic about that is the
middle-class neighborhoods
were really our launch
pads for upward mobility
in the American dream thus
Florida's first epiphany the
growing divide within cities
between the rich and the
rest who are being forced
out of town though we
also had a second insight
that divide between cities
winner-take-all urbanism
the winners San Francisco
New York the losers cities
like Detroit Milwaukee
Memphis and even in these
stressed cities creative class
clustering is beginning to
segregate the rich from the
rest but wait a second the
winning cities simply
followed Florida's own advice
suggesting a pointed question
about what he calls the new
urban crisis did he help
caused it I think I really
wanted to help cities
understand that urban revival
but that urban revival you
know according to the
data we now have it's 2002
now where that the urban
revival goes into full bore
and I think I was not only
surprised shocked by the
speed of it and and shocked
by the way it put pressure
on cities but then what
if anything can
to close the gap
well one answer building
public transit to connect
the lagging outskirts to jobs
in the booming urban core
and hey the 34th Street
and Hudson Yards subway
station just opened in 2015 it's
spectacular
but if you look at most
of the subway stops and
transit hubs Penn Station
they're falling apart Penn
Station New York's key
commuter hub is evermore
haunted by delays and
cancellations the result of
aging infrastructure but if
you really modernize a
city's transit system
you run back into the
double-edged sword of
Florida's advice the better
the transit the denser and
more productive the city the
less its lower end workers
will be able to afford
to live in it the more of
a rich Enclave it becomes
well yes that may be true
Florida acknowledges and so
he says that today's cities
have to start insisting
you want to build a tower
like that if you want to
get the rights to create
height and density we're
going to make a trade
and a trade we're going
to make and what are you
for you to go up like that
you're going to make
affordable housing affordable
housing the only real way to
try to close the gap says
Florida so why not muscle
developers to offer workers
in their projects cheap
rents good wages why not
have your tenants be the ones
that are creating better
higher-paying service jobs
that are creating a family
supporting job so we
can have an inclusionary
prosperity in cities can
say we'll trade density for
good things that developers
will do in order to get
the density they want the
height they want they've
got to build affordable
housing and they've got
to build a more inclusive
community but if they don't
we're left with the two
faces of Florida's present
creative class advice
that's the great contradiction
of today's urbanized
capitalism you know if
we want to have a productive
city and innovative city
a country that innovates
and creates good jobs we
need them but at the same
time that the very thing
that is driving our
economy forward is creating
these divides for the PBS
Newshour this is economics
correspondent Paul Solman
reporting from and below the
High Line in New York City